Let's start with a quick recap. What is
an AI agent? It's more than a chatbot.
At its core is an LLM, a large language
model that can reason, but what makes it
an agent are three key capabilities.
First, tools, the ability to take real
actions in the world. Second, memory, so
it can remember context across steps.
And third, autonomy, the ability to
decide what to do next without being
told. It reasons about what to do, takes
action, and learns from the results.
Now, let's look at the agent loop. the
pattern that drives every AI agent. It
starts with think. The agent examines
the problem and reasons about what to do
next. Then it moves to act. It calls a
tool, writes code or sends a request.
Finally, it observes the result and
decides whether to continue. Each step
feeds into the next. For example, the
agent thinks, I need to find this file.
It acts by searching the codebase. It
observes the results, then loops back.
This is called the react pattern and it
repeats until the task is done. Now,
here's the concept most people miss.
What is an agent harness? Think of it
this way. The agent is the engine. It
does the thinking and reasoning. But an
engine doesn't drive itself. You need
the harness, which is the entire car,
the steering, brakes, and dashboard. The
agent is the brain. The harness is the
infrastructure that makes it safe and
useful. So, what does the harness
provide? Tool execution. Actually
running the tools. The agent picks.
Permissions controlling what the agent
can do. Sandboxing to keep things safe.
Context management so the agent doesn't
lose its place. And human in the loop so
you stay in control. Let's make the
distinction crystal clear. On the left,
what the agent does, it handles
reasoning, figuring out what needs to
happen. It does planning, breaking tasks
into steps. It picks which tools to use,
and it makes decisions about what to do
next. on the right. What the harness
does, it handles tool execution,
actually running the tool. It enforces
permissions and sandboxing. It manages
the context window and session
persistence. And it provides guardrails
to keep things safe. They work together.
The agent decides to edit a file. The
harness checks permissions, runs the
edit in a sandbox, and asks the user to
approve. Let's go deep on a real
harness. Claude Code is one of the most
complete agent harnesses in production
today. At the top is its permission
system. It has three tiers. Auto approve
for safe reads, prompt the user for
rights, and a classifier for auto mode
decisions. Below that is the tool layer.
About 40 tools including file
operations, bash, web fetch, lsb, and
git. Next is the context engine, 46,000
lines of code handling token caching,
retries, and context window management.
and at the bottom session persistence
storing everything in JSL files. Other
harnesses like cursor, windsurf, clin
and ader follow similar patterns. Now
let's talk about the glue that connects
everything. MCP the model context
protocol. Think of it as USBC for AI.
It's an open standard that connects any
AI app to any external tool. Here's how
it works. The host is your AI
application like cloud code or cursor.
It contains a client that speaks the MCP
protocol. That client talks to servers
which wrap external tools and data
sources. Under the hood, it's JSo NRPC
over SDO or HTTP. Simple and universal.
The best part, it's been adopted by
Anthropic, Google, and OpenAI. One
protocol to connect them all. Now, let's
talk about agent SDKs and frameworks.
These are the tools that help you build
agents. Claude agent SDK is minimal and
MCPn native. Its tool use first built
for production. Lang graph handles
complex multi-step workflows with
graph-based orchestration. It scored 87%
on swb bench. Crewai makes it easy to
prototype agent teams with role-based
collaboration. 20 lines to start. Open
AAI agents SDK focuses on context
variables and streaming and autogen is
eventdriven and a sync first. Great for
complex pipelines. Pick the right tool
for your use case. Now let's zoom out
and see the full ecosystem. At the
bottom layer, we have LLMs, the
reasoning engines like Claude, GPT, and
Gemini. They provide the intelligence.
One layer up SDKs and frameworks like
Lang Graph, Crew AI, and the agent SDK.
They help you build agents. At the top,
harnesses like Cloud Code, Cursor, and
Windsurf. They run agents reliably. and
connecting everything on the side is MCP
plugging agents into external tools and
APIs. Each layer has a clear job. LLMs
think frameworks build harnesses run MCP
connects. So here's your formula for
building a production agent. Start with
an LLM, add an SDK, run it in a harness,
connect it with MCP, and you get a
production agent. The age of agents is
here. Pick an LLM. Choose a framework.
Run it in a harness. Connect it with
MCP.